---
authors: 
  - name: Tumppi066
    link: https://github.com/Tumppi066
    avatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/83072683?v=4
date: 2024-3-3
icon: book
title: Translation with YAML
tags: 
  - tutorial
---

This page contains the instructions for translating ETS2LA to other languages.

##### Forbidden files: 
==+ [!badge variant="ghost" text="Do not edit this file!"] [!badge variant="dark" text="keys.yaml"] 
This file contains all the translation keys, the app will validate translation files against the contents of this file.
==+ [!badge variant="ghost" text="Do not edit this file!"] [!badge variant="dark" text="en.yaml"] 
This file contains the base English translations. When translating use this as a reference point.
==+

##### Example file:
```yaml
Language:
  name: "Suomi"
  # ^ The name of the language in its own language. Example: "Suomi"
  name_en: "Finnish"
  # ^ The name of the language in English. Example: "Finnish"
  iso_code: "fi"
  # ^ The ISO 639-1 code for the language. Example: "fi"
  credits: "Kääntäjänä toimi Tumppi066, kiitos latauksesta ja toivottavasti pidät!"
  # ^ The credits for the language show in the UI.
  version: "2.0.0"
  # ^ Latest compatible version. Checked by the UI for compatibility.

Translations:

  # MARK: Globals

  confirm: "Vahvista"
  cancel: "Peruuta"
  'yes': "Kyllä"
  'no': "Ei"
  continue: "Jatka"
  loading: "Ladataan..."
  success: "Onnistui"
  # ^ Usually used in a statement that says something was successful. Example: [Something was completed] 'Success!'
  error: "Epäonnistui"
  # ^ Usually used in a statement that says something was unsuccessful. Example: [Something was not completed] 'Error!'
  done: "Valmis"
  set: "Asetettu"
  # ^ Something was set. Example: [Stay on top set to true] 'Set'
  setting: "Asetetaan..."
  # ^ The act of setting something. Example: [Setting stay on top to true] 'Setting...'
  unknown: "Tuntematon"
  download: "Lataa"
  downloading: "Ladataan {0}..."
  # ^ {0} is the name of what is being downloaded. Example: 'Downloading model...'
  clear: "Tyhjennä"
  search: "Etsi"
  submit: "Lähetä"
  install: "Asenna"
  uninstall: "Poista"
  ...
```

##### Translation process
==- 1. Discord
1. Go to the [ETS2LA Discord server](https://ets2la.com/discord), then ping `Tumppi066` or `Moderator` to receive the translation role. Please note that if your language is completely new (not even started yet) then you can begin translating before receiving the role.
2. Go to the [#translations](https://discord.com/channels/1120719484982939790/1272264777997226179) forum and find the post of the language you want to translate. If it doesn't exist, create a new post.
3. If you are not the first person, then check with others on the current progress of the language (you can use `@here` to ping everyone that has commented on the post).
=== 2. Translating
1. Copy the `en.yaml` file file `app/Translations` and rename it to your language's ISO code (`fi.yaml`, `de.yaml`, etc...).
2. Change the variables in the `Language` category to match your language.
3. Check the translation guidelines below.
4. Start translating the keys in the `Translations` category.
==- 3. Testing
1. Copy your file to the `app/Translations` folder.
2. Start the app with the `--dev --local` flags to use your local translations. If you use the launcher to install the app, then these settings can be found in the launcher settings.
!!! Warning
**Do not update the app until you've submitted your translations!**
**Do not run the app without `--dev` until you've submitted your translations!**
!!!
==- 4. Submitting
##### Manually
Send the edited file in the discord forum of your own language. Then ping either *DylDev* or *Tumppi066* to update the translations with your file.
##### Automatically
Make a PR (pull request) on the [Translations repository](https://github.com/ETS2LA/translations) with your file. This is preferred but you can just as well just ping us.
===

### Translation Guidelines
==- General
1. **Be consistent!** If you translate a word one way, keep it that way throughout the translation.
2. **Work with others!** This is often a multi-person job, so make sure to communicate with the others to setup your own guidelines.
3. **This is not a job!** If you don't have time to translate immediately, that's fine. Most of the time there are others and if you are the only translator, then don't worry about it!
==+ Special characters
1. **Preserve special characters!** If the English text has special characters (like `\n`, `\t`, `:` etc... or spaces at the start or end), make sure to keep them in the translation.
2. **Do not add special characters!** If the English text doesn't have special characters, don't add them.
==+ Variables
We use variables in the translations to add dynamic content. They are written as `{0}`, `{1}`, `{2}` etc... and are replaced with the actual content when the translation is used. You can usually see what the variables mean in the comment below the line, there's also often a sample of what it would look like in english.

```yaml
downloading: "Ladataan {0}..."
# ^ {0} is the name of what is being downloaded. Example: 'Downloading model...'
```
==+